# `assembly-theory` Scripts

As with many open-source projects, `scripts/` is the junk drawer of supporting code external to the `assembly-theory` library itself.


## Installation

We use [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) to manage Python environments. [Install it](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/) and then run the following to get all dependencies:

```shell
# Make sure you're in the scripts/ directory!
uv sync
```


## Scripts Catalog

### `dataset_curation.ipynb`

This Python notebook generates and documents the molecule datasets in `data/` curated from existing databases.
To view and interact with the notebook, run:

```shell
uv run jupyter notebook dataset_curation.ipynb
```

Or, if you just want to run the code:

```shell
uv run jupyter execute dataset_curation.ipynb
```

> [!NOTE]
> The notebook may take a while to run, since it downloads full datasets from Zenodo and then extracts the desired subsets. 
> Jupyter does not provide a way of redirecting the internal kernel's stdout to the terminal, so the various progress update messages are invisible when run in this way.


### `generate-ma-index.sh`

While the above Python notebook curates the reference dataset `.mol` files, this script generates their ground truth assembly indices in `data/<dataset>/ma-index.csv`.
This file is needed before a dataset can be used for testing.

From the `scripts/` directory, run this script to be presented with interactive menus for generation:

```shell
./generate-ma-index.sh
```

The first menu asks you to choose the dataset to generate ground truth for.
Enter a number to choose the dataset:

```shell
1) ../data/checks       3) ../data/gdb13_1201
2) ../data/coconut_55   4) ../data/gdb17_200
Generate ma-index.csv for: 
```

The next menu asks you which program to use for assembly index calculation.
Again, enter a number to choose:

```shell
1) assembly_go (Jirasek et al., 2024)
2) assembly_cpp (Seet et al., 2024)
3) assembly-theory
Calculate assembly indices using: 
```

[`assembly_go`](https://github.com/croningp/assembly_go) is existing, open-source software for calculating assembly indices.
We do not package its source code or its executable with our library, but it can be obtained [on GitHub](https://github.com/croningp/assembly_go) if non-self-referential ground truth is desired.
[`assembly_cpp`] is the current state-of-the-art algorithm by Seet et al. (2024) and was provided to us by its authors on the condition that it remains private and is used only for this ground-truth generation.
Otherwise, a release build of `assembly-theory` is created and used.

### `ring-data.py`

Rings present a challenge to any assembly index algorithm because the number of subgraphs grows quickly with the number of rings. This script will download a file from the [COMPAS project](https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2024/cp/d4cp01027b) of Polybenzenoid hydrocarbons (PBHs), these are fused benzene rings. We select molecules with 8 rings or fewer, and save them to mol files. This results in 415 molecules saved to `polycyclic_hydrocarbons` along with metadata. 

### `alkene-sampling.py`
See information in about `ring-data` above. This script will generate a complementary data set of molecules that have the same number of bonds and double bonds as the molecules generated by `ring data`. This is a useful control experiment to understand the impact of rings on performance characteristics. These molecules are generated though a hierachical rejection sampler, first sampling randomly labelled trees with a maximum degree of 4, and then sampling edges to convert to double bonds and verifying that labelling does not violate valence rules. The rejection sampling involved is somewhat slow. This results in 415 molecules saved to `data/acyclic_hydrocarbons` along with a csv of metadata. 